# Battle of Split 1943

The First Battle of Split was fought between the forces of the People's Liberation Army of Yugoslavia and the forces of the Wehrmacht and the NDH from 11 September to 2 October 1943, with the aim of defending Split after the capitulation of Italy.

After the capitulation of Italy, the people of Split, led by local people's liberation committees, took power in the city and its surroundings on 9 September and disarmed the units of the Italian 18th Corps. Over the following days, the 1st Dalmatian Brigade of the NOVJ and the Split Partisan Detachment arrived in Split and its surroundings.

As part of Operation Axis, and with the aim of taking over Italian weapons and ensuring the loyalty of the Italian army, the command of the German 2nd Panzer Army sent parts of the 7th SS Division towards Split. These parts landed in the nearby city of Sinj, and then continued their advance towards Split with the 27th Ustasha Battalion, capturing Klis on September 11. There they were stopped and surrounded by units of the NOVJ. The citizens of Split and the surrounding area joined the NOVJ units en masse.

Both sides had to reinforce their forces. The Germans were airlifting new contingents to Sinj, and the remaining part of the 7th SS Division, reinforced by the 92nd Motorized Regiment, began to advance by land from the direction of Imotski. On the other hand, from September 16, the First Proletarian and Fourth Krajina Divisions of the NOVJ entered central Dalmatia. The German land column was defeated and thrown back on September 18 near the village of Zvečanja. The Third Krajina Brigade of the NOVJ arrived in the vicinity of Sinj on September 20 and interrupted air traffic.

After the unsuccessful attack on Sinj by the 3rd and 6th Krajina Brigades on September 22/23, the situation for the defenders deteriorated significantly. The 7th SS Division and the 92nd Motorized Regiment from the bridgeheads on the Cetina River, starting on September 23, strongly penetrated towards the Split-Sinj line from the east, and the 114th Division from the Šibenik and Drniš areas from the west. On September 24, the NOVJ headquarters made a decision to destroy all military installations and evacuate Split. After fighting with partisan protectors, parts of the 7th SS Division entered Split on September 27. While advancing towards Split and establishing German-Ustasha rule, these formations carried out ruthless terror and killed several hundred civilians.

After entering Split, German forces continued their attack on NOVJ positions on Mount Mosor, in order to secure Split and eliminate threats. On October 2, NOVJ units withdrew from Mosor to reorganize, form the 8th Corps, and to participate in the battles for Livno.