# Knin Operation, 1944


The "Knin Operation" was an offensive by which the Yugoslav Partisans liberated Knin in December 1944, defeating the Axis forces and completing the takeover of Dalmatia. The "Knin Operation" in the narrow sense includes the fighting for the city of Knin itself and its immediate surroundings (25 November - 5 December), and in the broader sense, the operation to liberate the wider area of ​​Dalmatia that began on 13 September. Given the heavy losses on both sides, it is considered the largest battle in the history of Dalmatia.

## Operational situation
The idea of ​​the German High Command in the fall of 1944 was to withdraw the 118th Fighter and 264th Infantry Divisions, the 92nd Motorized Brigade and the 1st "Brandenburg" Regiment from the Dalmatian Front and make them available to the 2nd Panzer Army to fight against the 3rd Ukrainian Front of the Red Army. The front line from Gacka to the Zrmanja mouth was to be taken over by three legionary divisions: 369th ("Devil"), 373rd ("Tiger") and 392nd ("Blue").

However, the offensive of the 8th Corps hindered and preempted these plans: during September, parts of the 118th Division were destroyed on Brač, and parts of the 369th Division on Pelješac. The 369th  Division suffered its heaviest defeat at the hands of the 26th Dalmatian Division on 22 October in Vukov Klanac near Metković. During the withdrawal from Šibenik on 3 November, the 893rd Regiment of the 264th Division was defeated on the way to Drniš.

In such a situation, faced with strong pressure, the Southeast Command had to abandon the withdrawal of the 264th Division and assign it the task of defending Knin. The 8th Corps Headquarters attempted a wide sweep of Knin, counting on a possible attempt to withdraw the Germans from Knin as well. However, it encountered strong resistance. The Germans decided on a persistent defense, determined to keep Knin at all costs as the westernmost fortification on their imagined front line.

## Opposing forces
At the time of the beginning of the first phase of the Knin operation, the following units were located in Knin and the surrounding area, in addition to the Headquarters of the 15th Mountain Army Corps:

 - 264th Infantry Division;
 - 383rd Reinforced Regiment of the 373rd Legionary Division;
 - parts of the 944th Artillery Regiment;
 - parts of the 29th regiment of fortress pioneers;
 - 581st and 583rd naval rifle battalions
 - remains of the 6th and 7th Ustasha brigades;
 - 2nd battalion of the 3rd crew brigade (home guards);
 - Dinaric Chetnik Division.

In addition to them, there were also some smaller units (for communication, supply, anti-aircraft defense, etc.). In total, there were about 20,000 soldiers in Knin (14,000 German, 1,500 Ustasha and Home Guards, and 4,500 Chetnik), which means that the enemy suffered losses of 7,500 soldiers during the first and second stages. The 847th regiment of the 392nd division was assigned to the communications towards Lika as reinforcement. All these units were under the command of the commander of the 15th Mountain Army Corps, General **Gustav Fehn**.

Opposite these forces stood the 8th Dalmatian Corps of the NOVJ, which had under its command the 9th, 19th, 20th, and 26th divisions, and one and a half battalions of the 1st Tank Brigade, with a total strength of about 32,000 NOVJ soldiers. The commander of the partisan forces was General **Petar Drapšin**.

## First attacks
From 7 to 15 November, the first phase of the attack on Knin took place, in which the 19th division operated in the direction of Gračac, 9 divisions from the direction of Bosansko Grahovo, the 26th division south of Knin, and the Knin fortifications themselves were attacked by 20th divisions from the west. The Germans successfully repelled the attack on the city with a persistent defense, and regained the lost communications to the north and northwest with counterattacks.

On November 17th, General Fehn moved his headquarters to Bihać. He evacuated the demoralized Ustasha from the Knin area. Homeguard Forces and handed over immediate command of the defense to **General Windisch**, commander of the 264th Infantry Division. Chetniks under the command of **Momčilo Đujić** in the last phase of the Knin operation left the German front near Knin and were transferred to the area of ​​Karlovac. The entire area of ​​Knin and key points on communications are carefully fortified with a connected system of trenches, bunkers, infantry obstacles and minefields.

## The final blow
Noticing that the enemy had the intention of persistently defending Knin, the headquarters of the 8th Corps drew up a new plan of attack. According to this plan, the 20th division will attack from the east on the city and on the northern communication, the 19th division from the west on the city and on the northwestern communication, the 26th division, reinforced with tank companies, will attack the city and advanced fortifications from the south, while the 9th division should intercept and destroy the German units that would eventually withdraw from Knin.

The attack on the 20th Division sector began on 25 November, and on the 19th and 26th Division sectors on 26 November at dawn. In all sectors, the 8th Corps units advanced very slowly, breaking extremely strong and persistent enemy resistance.

Day and night attacks and counterattacks took place with varying success and with significant losses on all parts of the front. Dissatisfied with the pace of the advance, Commander Drapšin brought in the last reserves on the morning of 1 December.

The German defense began to break on the evening of 2 December. The next day at around 8 am the units of the 20th division attacking from the east and the 19th division attacking from the west joined immediately north of the city and closed the ring around Knin. At the same time, the 26th Division was invading the southern part of the city and the remaining German forces were left to try to form strike groups and try to save themselves by breaking through. Most of it was destroyed in the city itself. The fate of those who broke through is described by Danilo Damjanović in the book "Sixth Dalmatian Brigade":

While the 14th and 5th brigades in the early hours of December 4 saw heavy battles with a densely echeloned German column, which managed to break through their defenses during the morning, the 6th brigade firmly held the right bank of Zrmanja, where it set up one battery, and at 12 o'clock it readily met the German frontal units, on which it opened murderous fire. There, heavy losses were inflicted on the Germans and a large amount of war booty was obtained (among other things, 6 cannons).
Thus, the further penetration of this German group was stopped, and the battalions of the 5th and 14th brigades launched a fierce attack along its flanks, and in several places our and German forces came into contact, hand-to-hand combat and direct suffocation. That fierce fight lasted until 2 pm. A very small part of the German forces managed to break through Paden, along the railway line, to Bender, where they were met and liquidated by the 3rd Brigade of the 9th Division, which had arrived there earlier.

On December 3, at 11 o'clock in the afternoon, Knin was liberated. The German defense was almost completely destroyed, and division commander Windisch managed to break through to the north, where he linked up with Chetnik units and with them broke through to southern Lika during the following days.

In the Knin operation, the 8th Corps of the NOVJ had 677 dead, 2439 wounded and 126 missing.

According to the report of the Command of the 15th Mountain Army Corps to the Command of Army Group E dated December 8, 1944, the total strength of the 264th Infantry Division on December 5 was 1,526 men. In October 1943, the same division had a full formation of 17,200 men. After the Knin operation, the 264th division was deleted from the register of Wehrmacht units, and the remaining personnel were assigned to other units. According to the same document, the fighting was full of sacrifices, and "losses were very high and led to the destruction of the 264th division and the disintegration of a larger part of the 373rd division".