# 8th Dalmatian Brigade

## Formation
The 8th Dalmatian Brigade, also known as the *Šibenik Brigade*, was formed on September 10, 1943 in the village of Sratok (today Bogdanovići) from the Šibenik NOP detachment and new fighters from Šibenik and the surrounding area. At the time of formation, it consisted of a headquarters, four battalions and staff units with a total of 890 fighters, of which 71 were women. It was part of the 20th Dalmatian Division from its founding in October 1943 until the end of the war.

## Operations
It participated in the fight against the German 114th and 264th divisions on the Šibenik-Trogir and Drniš-Muć-Split routes. It successfully defended the Sinj-Prolog route. 
 * It defended the routes from Šibenik to Perković and Trogir during October and November 1943, and suffered significant losses in those battles. 
 * In December, during the "Ziethen" operation, it defended the route Sinj - Vaganj - Livno. 
 * At the beginning of March 1944, it found herself in a difficult situation due to a concentrated German attack between Perković and Trogir, and suffered significant losses during the withdrawal. 
 * In April, it participated in the battles for Vrlika, and in July 1944, it prevented the penetration of German forces from Sinj, Prolog and Vrlika towards Dinara. 
 * At the end of July 1944, it liberated the Vrlička Krajina. 
 * During the offensive for the liberation of Dalmatia at the end of October, it liberated the Hrvace and Sinj and participated in the destruction of the Ustaša Home Defense Group "Cetina". 
 * It participated in the Knin operation in November and December 1944,

In the final operations, he participated in the liberation of Bihać. Together with Kočevska group, the brigade destroyed the stronger Chetnik forces in Banjska Loka. It stood out in the street fights in Trieste from April 30, 1945.

It was awarded the Order of Merit for the Nation with a golden star and the Order of Brotherhood and Unity with a golden wreath.