# 1st Proletarian Division

## Formation
 - **Date of formation**: November 1, 1942
 - **Place of formation**: Bosanski Petrovac
 - **Constituent brigades**:
 	- 1st Proletarian Brigade
 	- 3rd Sandžak Proletarian Brigade (until June 1943)
 	- 3rd Krajina Brigade
 - **Strength at the time**: 3,200 fighters
 - **Commander**: Koča Popović (untill November 1943),
 - **Commisar**: Filip Kljajić Fića (until July 1943)

In June 1943, the 3rd Sandžak Brigade left the Division, and in November 1943, the 13th Proletarian Brigade entered the permanent composition of the Division. The division also included the 7th Krajina Brigade from mid-July to mid-August 1943; 8th Montenegrin Brigade from November 6, 1944 to March 7, 1945; brigade "Italy" (composed of Italian volunteers) from October 29, 1944 and the Artillery Brigade from November 21, 1944. At the end of 1944, the Division had 12,367 fighters, and by the April 15, 1945 it had 11,775 fighters. From January 1, 1945, the 1st Proletarian Division operated in the 1st Army of the Yugoslav Army.

## Operations
After its formation, it began its operations towards central Bosnia. From November 19 to December 4, 1942, it liquidated the garrisons in Sitnica, Čađavica, Mrkonjić Grad, Jajce (in cooperation with the 3rd Division), Skender Vakuf and Kotor Varoš. During January 1943, it occupied Teslić and Prnjavor.

During the Battle of the Neretva in the offensive in the Neretva valley, it represented the left attack column, took part in the counterattack near Gornji Vakuf and in the defeat of the Chetniks near Nevesinje and Kalinovik.

During the Battle of Sutjeska, it participated in the attack in the Foča area at the end of May, and played a major role in the breakthrough of the Zelengora encirclement, inflicting a heavy blow on the 369th legionary division.

The 3rd Proletarian Brigade left the division on June 4, 1943. From September 1, the division was part of the First Proletarian Corps. From November 1943, the 13th Proletarian Strike Brigade "Rade Končar" was included in its composition, with which it went through fierce battles during the winter operations of 1944, the "Resselsprung" operation, the "Rübbezahl" operation, the offensive in western Serbia in September 1944, the Belgrade operation and the Srem front.

The 1st Proletarian Division ended its war journey on May 20, 1945 by stationing in the area of Trieste and Gorizia.