# 19th Dalmatian Division

## Formation
 - **Date of formation**: October 6, 1943
 - **Place of formation**: Biovičina Selo in Bukovica
 - **Constituent brigades**: 
 	- 5th Dalmatian Brigade
 	- 6th Dalmatian Brigade
 	- 7th Dalmatian Brigade (till June 1944, when it moved to Lika and subordinated to the 35th Lika Division)
 	- 14 Dalmatian Brigade (from June, as a refillment for 7th Brigade)
 	- North Dalmatian NOP detachment Group
 - **Strength at the time**: 3,600 fighters 							 
 - **Commander**: Milan Kuprešanin, later Milan Šakić Mićun
 - **Commisar**: Petar Babić


In January 1944, the 7th Dalmatian Brigade moved to Lika and was tactically subordinated to the 35th Division. After its official entry into the 35th Division in June 1944, the 14 Dalmatian Brigade was formed in Dalmatia to supplement the formation of the 19th Division.

## Operations
From its establishment until the end of the war, the division was part of the 8th Dalmatian Corps. The area of northern Dalmatia was part of the area covered by the German 15th Mountain Corps of the 2nd Panzer Army. Until the beginning of December 1943, the area was held by the 114th Fighter Division, then the 264th Infantry Division, the 1st Brandenburg Regiment and the 92nd Motorized Regiment.

The nineteenth division led offensive actions against German and NDH positions in northern Dalmatia, as well as in the border areas with Lika, Bosnia and in central Dalmatia, in cooperation with other NOVJ forces. Against the units of the division, the Germans organized dozens of larger and smaller operations, using, in addition to German forces, parts of the 6th and 7th Ustasha Zdrug and the Dinaric Division of the JVuO.

At the beginning of September 1944, due to the crisis in Serbia, the 2nd Panzer Army was forced to withdraw the 1st Brandenburg Regiment and the 92nd Motorized Regiment from the area of the 19th Division. This led to a change in the balance of forces and the 19th division went on the offensive against the 264th division, Ustasha and Chetniks. As part of these battles, the division captured Benkovac on September 9, defeating the German reinforced 2nd Battalion of the 891st Regiment, the Chetnik Benkovac Brigade and the 5th Ustasha Battalion. Given that Benkovac is a key central point for the defense of northern Dalmatia, the Germans managed to recapture it after a three-day battle. After a month of fighting for the surrounding strongholds, the 19th Division finally liberated Benkovac on October 10.

After the consolidating the other forces of the 8th Corps, the Knin operation was launched, which liquidated the main stronghold on the right flank of the German "green line" of the front and destroyed the 264th division.

From March 20, 1945, the division, as part of the 4th Army, participated in the Lika-Primorje and Trieste operations against the German 15th and 97th Mountain Corps, which were destroyed in these operations.