# 2nd Proletarian Division

## Formation
 - **Date of formation**: November 1, 1942
 - **Place of formation**: Tičevo, near Bosansko Grahovo
 - **Constituent brigades**: 
 	- 2nd Proletarian Brigade
 	- 4th Montenegrin Brigade
 	- 2nd Dalmatian Brigade (until January 1944)
 - **Strength at the time**: 3,280 fighters
 - **Commander**: Peko Dapčević (until September 1943)
 - **Commisar**: Mitar Bakić

During the war, the Division often changed its composition. In the period September-December 1944, the 2nd Proletarian Brigade was part of the 21st Serbian Division, and the 4th Montenegrin Brigade was part of the 3rd Strike Division in the period September 1943-January 1944. In September 1943, the 3rd Proletarian Sandžak Brigade temporarily joined the Division, and the 2nd Dalmatian Brigade left the Division in January 1944. The Division also included the 3rd Serbian Proletarian Brigade, from February 1944; The 6th Serbian Brigade, from November 1944 (disbanded in March 1945) and the Artillery Brigade from March 1945.

## Operations
The division was under the direct command of the Supreme Commander of the NOV and POJ until September 10, 1943. After, it was  part of the 2nd Strike Corps, Strike Division Group. From September to December 1944 it was under the command of the Main Staff of the NOV and PO of Serbia and from January 1945 as part of the 1st Army of the Yugoslav Army. It was considered one of the elite units of the NOVJ. At the end of 1944, the Division had 9,886, and in February 1945, 10,142 fighters.

After the formation of the division as a whole, it launched a successful attack on the Ustasha garrisons of Livno and Duvno in December 1942. In January 1943, it attacked Italian-Chetnik forces in the Bosansko Grahovo-Knin area, and in February it liquidated the Ustasha garrison in Imotski.

During the battle on the Neretva, in the offensive in the Neretva valley, it represented the right attack column, it participated in the counter-attack near Gornji Vakuf and in the defeat of the Chetniks near Nevesinje and Kalinovik.

During the Battle of Sutjeska, it took part in fierce battles for the bridgehead in the Sutjeska valley and during the breakthrough of the ring on Zelengora and on the Foča-Kalinovik road.

From September 1, 1943, she was in the 2nd Strike Corps NOVJ. At the beginning of December 1943, it suffered a defeat from the German 1st Mountain Division during the "Kugelblitz" operation, which led to the dismissal of the Division Headquarters headed by Commander Ljubodrag Đurić. Ljubo Vučković, a national hero, was appointed as the new commander.

From March to May 1944, she took part in operations through Serbia, and then in battles against the Germans, Chetniks and the Muslim "Krempler" legion in Sandžak. The 2nd Dalmatian Proletarian Strike Brigade left the division on January 27, 1944. The division included the 3rd Serbian Brigade from February 10, 1944, the 6th Serbian Brigade from November 16, 1944, and the Artillery Brigade from March 15, 1945. The 2nd Proletarian Shock Brigade was part of the 21st Serbian Division from September to December 1944, and then again in the 2nd Division.

From the beginning of August 1944, the 2nd Proletarian Division fought under the direct command of the Main Headquarters of the NOV and PO of Serbia in the West Morava Valley, and from January to April 1945, it participated in the battles on the Srem Front. At the end of December 1944, there were 9,886 fighters in its composition.

All three brigades that were part of the 2nd Proletarian Division when it was founded were given a title *Proletarian* and awarded the Order of National Hero.