# 20th Dalmatian Division

## Formation
 - **Date of formation**: October 10, 1943
 - **Place of formation**: Vrdovo na Dinara mountain
 - **Constituent brigades**: 
 
 	- 8th (Šibenik) Brigade
 	- 9th (Trogir) Brigade
 	- 10th (Cetina) Brigade
 	- 5th Overseas Brigade (February-April 1944)
 - **Strength at the time**: 3100 fighters 							 
 - **Commander**: Velimir Knežević
 - **Commisar**: Živko Živković


## Operations
From its establishment until the end of the war, the division was part of the 8th Dalmatian Corps. The basic operational area of the division was central Dalmatia with a focus on Dinara, Svilaja and Dalmatian Zagora.
One part of Central Dalmatia belonged to the zone of the German 15th Mountain Corps, and the other to the 5th SS Corps of the Second Panzer Army. Part of the German 264th Division, part of the 118th Fighter Division and forces of the 7th SS Division operated on the territory of the 20th Division. In addition to the Germans, the Chetnik, Ustasha and Home Guard forces also took part in the battles with the forces of the 20th Division. The most significant battles are: against the German forces on the Sinj-Livno route during the operation "Ziethen". As a counterbalance to the German actions, the division attacked and liberated Vrlika in December 1943.

The division fought heavy battles in the defense of the free territory on Dinara during the offensive of German, Ustasha and Chetnik forces in April 1944. During the countermeasures in May 1944, it liberated Aržano, where it destroyed an Ustasha battalion.

During September 1944, the 20th Division also participated in the NOVJ offensive for the liberation of Dalmatia.

After the consolidating the other forces of the 8th Corps, the Knin operation was launched, which liquidated the main stronghold on the right flank of the German "green line" of the front and destroyed the 264th division.

From March 20, 1945, the division, as part of the 4th Army, participated in the Lika-Primorje and Trieste operations against the German 15th and 97th Mountain Corps, which were destroyed in these operations.