# 29th Herzegovina Division

## Formation
The 29th Herzegovina Division was formed by order of the Supreme Headquarters of the NOV and POJ from November 16, 1943. It was created on the basis of the pre-existing 10th Herzegovina Strike Brigade, which had been reinforced after losses at the Battle of Sutjeska and reorganized into a full division. The 29th Division consisted of 3 brigades (10th Herzegovinian Brigade, 2nd Herzegovinian Brigade, and 3rd Herzegovinian Brigade), with total of around 2000 fighters. Since the formation, he division was part of the 2nd Corps of NOVJ. The division's commander was **Vlado Šegrt**, and commsary was **Dragiša Ivanović**. 

On January 13, 1944, the numbering of the brigades was changed: the 2nd Herzegovina Brigade was renamed to the 11th, and the 3rd was renamed the 12th.

On June 14, 1944, the 13th, and on October 16, 1944, the 14th Herzegovinian brigade joined the division. The headquarters of the division also commanded detachments and independent battalions on the territory of Herzegovina, and on February 27, 1945, the division also received an artillery brigade.

## Operations
Until January 1945, the 29th Division fought against units of the German 5th SS Corps, whose units were in charge of eastern Bosnia, Herzegovina and southern Dalmatia. Herzegovina was covered by the 7th SS division until the spring of 1944, which was then replaced by the 369th legionary. Parts of the 118th fighter division from southern Dalmatia were also engaged in the actions.

Under the direct tactical command of the 5th SS Corps were the 6th Infantry Division of the NDH with headquarters in Mostar, and the 9th Ustaša Zdrug, also headquartered in Mostar. On the ground there were numerous units of the Ustaša Home Guard militia and JVuO formations.

For the Mostar operation it was subordinated to the headquarters of the 8th Corps, and for the Sarajevo operation directly to the headquarters of the 2nd Army.

Since mid-April, the division has been subordinated to the headquarters of the 4th Army for cooperation in the Trieste operation. With part of the forces, the division liberated Ljubljana on May 8, together with the units of the 7th Slovenian Corps.