# 3rd Strike Division

## Formation
 - **Date of formation**: November 9, 1942
 - **Place of formation**: Perduhovo Selo, near Glamoč
 - **Constituent brigades**: 
 	- 5th Montenegrin Brigade
 	- 10th Herzegovina Brigade (until December 1943)
 	- 1st Dalmatian Strike Brigade
 - **Strength at the time**: 3,200 fighters
 - **Commander**: Pero Ćetković (until March 1943)
 - **Commisar**: Radomir Babić

## Operations
After the formation of the division as a whole, it participated in the battles for Jajce at the end of November and the beginning of December 1942. Then it moved on to acting on Axis garrisons and communications in central Bosnia.

### Battles of Neretva and Sutjeska
During the Battle of the Neretva in the offensive in the Neretva valley, it represented the middle attack column and captured the Italian garrison in Prozor. It participated in the counterattack near Gornji Vakuf and in the defeat of the Chetniks near Nevesinje and Kalinovik. Commander Pero Ćetković, a national hero, died in Nevesinje on March 28, 1943.

During the Battle of Sutjeska, it was part of the Southern Operational Group. She remained in protective custody with the Central Hospital. During the attempt to break through the German positions in the Sutjeska valley on June 13, 1943, the division suffered heavy losses, was broken into several battalion groups, some of which broke through and joined the Operational Group of the Supreme Headquarters, while others broke through to Herzegovina, Montenegro and Sandžak. During the attempt to break through, the third commander of the division, **Sava Kovačević**, was killed in the assault. During this battle, the 10th Herzegovina Division temporarily left the Division, and the 3rd Proletarian Sandžak Brigade temporarily entered (until September 1943). The 1st Dalmatian brigade suffered heavy losses during the battle, and it disperesed: one of its batallions broke into Herzegovina and joined the 10th Herzegovina Brigade, while the remaining battalions moved to Dalmatia and joined the rebuilt 9th Dalmatian Division. 

### Reorganization after the battles
The 3rd Division was rebuilt at the beginning of September 1943. Its composition now consisted of the 4th Proletarian Montenegrin Strike Brigade, the 5th Proletarian Montenegrin Strike Brigade and the 10th Herzegovinian Strike Brigade and was subordinated to the 2nd Strike Corps. At the end of 1943, instead of the 10th Herzegovina and 4th Montenegrin brigades, the 6th and 7th Montenegrin Youth Brigades entered the composition. From April 1944 until the end of the war, the division included the 5th, the 7th and the 9th Montenegrin Brigades, Artillery Division (from April 20, 1945, Artillery Brigade), and the 1st Italian Brigade of the "Garibaldi" Division, from May 9, 1944 to February 23, 1945.

As part of 2nd Corps, the division fought almost continuously with units of the German 21st Army Corps and with the Chetniks. After the liberation of Montenegro, the division participated in the Sarajevo operation and the liberation of Karlovac. On May 12, 1945, near Zidani Most, together with the 4th and 10th Krajina Divisions, they captured the German 7th SS Division "Prince Eugen" and the 373rd Legionary Division.

From January 1945, as a part of the 2nd Army of the Yugoslav Army, the Division had over 5,600 fighters. It was considered one of the elite units of the NOVJ.