# 9th Dalmatian Division

## Formation
 - **Date of formation**: February 13, 1943
 - **Place of formation**: Imotski
 - **Constituent brigades**: 
 	- 3th Dalmatian Brigade
 	- 4th Dalmatian Brigade
 	- 5th Dalmatian Brigade 

 - **Strength at the time**: 2,119. After merging with a Naval Detachment on 18 February its strength rose to about 3,600 							 
 - **Commander**: Vicko Krstulović
 - **Commisar**: Ivan Kukoč


## Operations
### Engagement at the Battle of the Neretva and protection of the wounded
During the Battle of the Neretva, the division fought defensive battles in the vicinity of Imotski and in western Herzegovina against the Chetniks and the Germans. During the transfer across the Neretva river, the NOV and POJ Supreme Headquarters engaged the division to transfer the wounded across the Prenj mountain and protect the Central Hospital. Movement under the load of stretchers with the wounded across the frozen mountain was a difficult test for poorly trained fighters. In addition to frostbite losses, during the transport of the wounded, a typhus epidemic took hold in the division, which greatly reduced the number of units.

### Disbandment
After the capture of Nevesinje, the division remained in Nevesinjsko Polje, engaged in repelling continuous Italian-Chetnik attacks. Due to the greatly reduced numbers and combat efficiency, the division was disbanded by order of the Supreme Headquarters on April 12, as well as the Fourth and Fifth Dalmatian Brigades. Most of its fighters were incorporated into the 3rd Dalmatian Brigade, while others reinforced the 1st and 2nd Dalmatian Brigades.  During the battle on Sutjeska, on June 3, 1943, the 3rd Dalmatian Assault Brigade was also disbanded.

### Reorganization
The 9th Dalmatian Division was rebuilt at the beginning of September 1943 by the decision of the headquarters of the 4th Operational Zone of the Main Headquarters of the NOV and PO of Croatia in the vicinity of Split. A headquarters headed by commander **Ante Banina** and political commissar **Eduard Santini** was formed, and the division consisted of the 1st and the newly re-formed 3rd Dalmatian Shock Brigade. On September 12, 1943, the newly formed 4th Dalmatian Brigade joined the division. All together, the division had about 3,500 fighters.
From the establishment of the 8th Dalmatian Corps on October 7, 1943, the 9th Dalmatian Division was its part until the end of the war.

### Liberation of Dalmatia and final operations
From December 1943 to the end of July 1944, the Adriatic hinterland was the scene of a series of well-planned and energetically conducted operations of the German 2nd Panzer Army aimed at securing vital points and communications and inflicting the hardest possible blows on the NOVJ. The 9th Dalmatian Division participated in all these operations and offensive countermeasures of the NOVJ in the Dalmatian hinterland between Livno and Lika. It finally liberated Livno on October 10, 1944, and after that represented the right-wing attack column that cooperated with other units of the 8th Dalmatian Corps during the Knin operation through the enemy rear. As of November 1944, its commander was **Ljubo Truta**, and its commisary was **Bogdan Pecotić**.

In February 1945, the division participated in the Mostar operation, and during March and April in the Lika and Primorje operation. During the Trieste operation, by landing from the island of Cres off the coast of Istria, it made an energetic incursion into the rear of the heavily fortified Rijeka front of the German 97th Corps, significantly contributing to the pace and ultimate success of the operation.

By decree of the NOV and POJ Supreme Headquarters in December 1944, the 9th Dalmatian Division was declared an assault division in recognition of its achievements.